README.md, before:

# automat firmware

Firmware for the [dadamachines automat](https://dadamachines.com/product/automat-controller/) MIDI-to-solenoid controller.

Built with [PlatformIO](https://platformio.org/) using the [Adafruit Arduino SAMD Core](https://github.com/adafruit/ArduinoCore-samd).

## Hardware

- MCU: SAMD21G18A (Cortex-M0+, 48 MHz)
- 256 KB Flash / 32 KB RAM
- 12 solenoid outputs via SPI shift registers
- USB MIDI + DIN MIDI input
- UF2 bootloader for drag-and-drop firmware updates

## Build

### Prerequisites

- [PlatformIO CLI](https://docs.platformio.org/en/latest/core/installation.html) or [PlatformIO IDE (VS Code extension)](https://platformio.org/platformio-ide)

### Compile

```bash
pio run
```

After a successful build the firmware files are in `.pio/build/automat/`:
- `firmware.bin` — raw binary
- `firmware.uf2` — UF2 file for drag-and-drop flashing

### Upload via SAM-BA (serial)

```bash
pio run -t upload
```

### Flash via UF2

1. Double-tap the reset button on the automat to enter the UF2 bootloader.
2. A USB drive named `AUTOMAT` will appear.
3. Drag `firmware.uf2` onto that drive.
4. The board resets automatically and runs the new firmware.

> **Note:** UF2 flashing requires the [dadamachines UF2 bootloader](https://github.com/dadamachines/uf2-samdx1/tree/dadamachines). If your automat still has the original SAM-BA-only bootloader, use `pio run -t upload` instead, or flash the UF2 bootloader once via SWD/JTAG.

## Dependencies

Managed automatically by PlatformIO (declared in `platformio.ini`):

| Library | Source |
|---|---|
| FlashStorage | [cmaglie/FlashStorage](https://github.com/cmaglie/FlashStorage) |
| Arduino MIDI Library | [FortySevenEffects/arduino_midi_library](https://github.com/FortySevenEffects/arduino_midi_library) |
| MIDIUSB | [arduino-libraries/MIDIUSB](https://github.com/arduino-libraries/MIDIUSB) |
| OneButton | [mathertel/OneButton](https://github.com/mathertel/OneButton) |

## Project Structure

```
├── platformio.ini              # PlatformIO build configuration
├── boards/
│   └── dadamachines_automat.json   # Custom board definition
├── variants/
│   └── automat/
│       ├── variant.h           # Pin mapping
│       └── variant.cpp         # Pin descriptions
├── src/
│   ├── main.cpp                # Main firmware
│   ├── automatConstants.h      # Board constants
│   ├── solenoidSPI.*           # Shift-register solenoid driver
│   ├── dadaMidiLearn.h         # MIDI learn mode
│   ├── dadaStatusLED.h         # Status LED controller
│   ├── dadaSysEx.*             # SysEx configuration protocol
│   ├── PWMManager.*            # PWM velocity control
│   └── humTiming.h             # Motor hum timing
└── extra_scripts/
    └── post_build_uf2.py       # Automatic .bin → .uf2 conversion
```

## Change log

- V3.00 — PlatformIO migration, Adafruit SAMD core, UF2 output
- V1.10 2018.04.15 — Velocity support added
- V1.00 2017.10.19 — Initial release

## Related Repositories

- [dadamachines/arduino-board-index](https://github.com/dadamachines/arduino-board-index) — Legacy Arduino Board Support Package
- [dadamachines/uf2-samdx1](https://github.com/dadamachines/uf2-samdx1/tree/dadamachines) — UF2 bootloader (fork of microsoft/uf2-samdx1)

## Contact

To report a bug, contribute, discuss on usage, or simply request support, please [create an issue here](https://github.com/dadamachines/automat-software/issues/new).

## License

[GPLv3](https://github.com/dadamachines/automat-software/blob/master/LICENSE) © 2018 [dadamachines](https://dadamachines.com)

Commit message:

V3.01: version bump, named UF2, README updates
- Bump SYSEX_FIRMWARE_VERSION to 0x03010000 (V3.01)
- UF2 output now named automat-sw_3.0.1.ino.automat.uf2
- README: add configurator link, update copyright, contact,
  changelog, mark arduino-board-index as superseded

README.md, after:

# automat firmware

Firmware for the [dadamachines automat](https://dadamachines.com/product/automat-controller/) MIDI-to-solenoid controller.

Built with [PlatformIO](https://platformio.org/) using the [Adafruit Arduino SAMD Core](https://github.com/adafruit/ArduinoCore-samd).

## Hardware

- MCU: SAMD21G18A (Cortex-M0+, 48 MHz)
- 256 KB Flash / 32 KB RAM
- 12 solenoid outputs via SPI shift registers
- USB MIDI + DIN MIDI input
- UF2 bootloader for drag-and-drop firmware updates

## Configuration

Use the [automat configurator](https://dadamachines.github.io/automat-configurator/) (WebMIDI) to set per-output velocity programs, min/max timing, and gate durations. Source: [dadamachines/automat-configurator](https://github.com/dadamachines/automat-configurator)

## Build

### Prerequisites

- [PlatformIO CLI](https://docs.platformio.org/en/latest/core/installation.html) or [PlatformIO IDE (VS Code extension)](https://platformio.org/platformio-ide)

### Compile

```bash
pio run
```

After a successful build the firmware files are in `.pio/build/automat/`:
- `firmware.bin` — raw binary
- `automat-sw_<version>.ino.automat.uf2` — UF2 file for drag-and-drop flashing

### Upload via SAM-BA (serial)

```bash
pio run -t upload
```

### Flash via UF2

1. Double-tap the reset button on the automat to enter the UF2 bootloader.
2. A USB drive named `AUTOMAT` will appear.
3. Drag `firmware.uf2` onto that drive.
4. The board resets automatically and runs the new firmware.

> **Note:** UF2 flashing requires the [dadamachines UF2 bootloader](https://github.com/dadamachines/uf2-samdx1/tree/dadamachines). If your automat still has the original SAM-BA-only bootloader, use `pio run -t upload` instead, or flash the UF2 bootloader once via SWD/JTAG.

## Dependencies

Managed automatically by PlatformIO (declared in `platformio.ini`):

| Library | Source |
|---|---|
| FlashStorage | [cmaglie/FlashStorage](https://github.com/cmaglie/FlashStorage) |
| Arduino MIDI Library | [FortySevenEffects/arduino_midi_library](https://github.com/FortySevenEffects/arduino_midi_library) |
| MIDIUSB | [arduino-libraries/MIDIUSB](https://github.com/arduino-libraries/MIDIUSB) |
| OneButton | [mathertel/OneButton](https://github.com/mathertel/OneButton) |

## Project Structure

```
├── platformio.ini              # PlatformIO build configuration
├── boards/
│   └── dadamachines_automat.json   # Custom board definition
├── variants/
│   └── automat/
│       ├── variant.h           # Pin mapping
│       └── variant.cpp         # Pin descriptions
├── src/
│   ├── main.cpp                # Main firmware
│   ├── automatConstants.h      # Board constants
│   ├── solenoidSPI.*           # Shift-register solenoid driver
│   ├── dadaMidiLearn.h         # MIDI learn mode
│   ├── dadaStatusLED.h         # Status LED controller
│   ├── dadaSysEx.*             # SysEx configuration protocol
│   ├── PWMManager.*            # PWM velocity control
│   └── humTiming.h             # Motor hum timing
└── extra_scripts/
    └── post_build_uf2.py       # Automatic .bin → .uf2 conversion
```

## Change log

- V3.01 — Version bump, named UF2 output, README updates
- V3.00 — PlatformIO migration, Adafruit SAMD core, UF2 output
- V1.10 2018.04.15 — Velocity support added
- V1.00 2017.10.19 — Initial release

## Related Repositories

- [dadamachines/automat-configurator](https://github.com/dadamachines/automat-configurator) — WebMIDI configurator for velocity/gate settings
- [dadamachines/uf2-samdx1](https://github.com/dadamachines/uf2-samdx1/tree/dadamachines) — UF2 bootloader (fork of microsoft/uf2-samdx1)
- [dadamachines/arduino-board-index](https://github.com/dadamachines/arduino-board-index) — Legacy Arduino Board Support Package (superseded by this PlatformIO project)

## Contact

To report a bug, contribute, discuss on usage, or simply request support, please [create an issue here](https://github.com/dadamachines/automat-software/issues/new) or reach out via [dadamachines.com/contact](https://dadamachines.com/contact/).

## License

[GPLv3](https://github.com/dadamachines/automat-software/blob/master/LICENSE) Copyright © 2014-2026, Johannes Elias Lohbihler for [dadamachines](https://dadamachines.com)
